doc/src/modules/solvers/solveset.rst, before:

Solveset
========

.. module:: sympy.solvers.solveset

Solveset Documentation
======================


What's wrong with solve():
==========================

SymPy already has a pretty powerful `solve` function. But it has a lot of major
issues

1. It doesn't have a consistent output for various types of solutions
   It needs to return a lot of types of solutions consistently:
   * single solution : ` x == 1`
   * Multiple solutions: `x**2 == 1`
   * No Solution: `x**2 + 1 == 0; x is real`
   * Interval of solution: `floor(x) == 0`
   * Infinitely many solutions: `sin(x) == 0`
   * Multivariate functions with point solutions: `x**2 + y**2 == 0`
   * Multivariate functions with non point solution: `x**2 + y**2 == 1`
   * System of equations: `x + y == 1` and `x - y == 0`
   * Relational: `x > 0`
   * And the most important case "We don't Know"


2. The input API is also a mess, there are a lot of parameters. Many of them
   are not needed and they make it hard for the user and the developers to
   work on solvers.

3. There are cases like finding the maxima and minima of function using
   critical points where it is important to know if it has returned all the
   solutions. `solve` does not guarantee this.

TODO

Why Solveset?
=============

* `solveset` has a cleaner input and output interface: `solveset` returns a set
  object and a set object take care of all the types of the output. For cases
  where it doesn't "know" all the solutions a `NotImplementedError` is raised.
  For input only takes the equation and the variables for which the equations
  has to be solved.

* `solveset` can return infinitely many solutions. For example solving for
  `sin(x) = 0` returns {2⋅n⋅π | n ∊ ℤ} ∪ {2⋅n⋅π + π | n ∊ ℤ} Whereas `solve`
  only returns [0, π]

* There is a clear code level and interface level separation between solvers
  for equations in complex domain and equations in real domain. For example
  solving `exp(x) = 1` when x is complex returns the set of all solutions that
  is {2⋅n⋅ⅈ⋅π | n ∊ ℤ} . Whereas if x is a real symbol then only {0} is
  returned.

* `solveset` returns a solution only when it can guarantee that it is returning
  all the solutions.



Why do we use Sets as an output type?
=====================================

The main reason for using sets as output to solvers is that it can consistently
represent many types of solutions. For single variable case it can represent:

  * No solution (by null set)

  * Finitely many solutions (by FiniteSet)

  * Infinitely many solutions, both countably and uncountably infinite solutions
  (using the ImageSet module) Interval

  * There can also be bizarre solutions to equations like set of all rational number.

  No other programmer's object (list, dictionary, python sets) provides the
  flexibility of mathematical sets which our sets module try to emulate. The
  second reason to use sets is that they are close to the entities which
  mathematician's deals with and it makes it easier to reason about them.
  Another advantage of using objects closer to mathematical entities is that the
  user won't have to "learn" our representation and she can have her expectations
  transferred from her mathematical experience.

  For multivariate case we are representing solutions as a set of points in a n
  dimensional space and a point is represented by a FiniteSet of ordered tuple.
  Please Note that, the General FiniteSet is unordered, but a FiniteSet with
  a tuple as it's first argument is ordered. For example:

  - FiniteSet(1, 2, 3) : {1, 2, 3}    # Unordered
  - FiniteSet((1, 2, 3)) {(1, 2, 3)}  # Ordered

  Why not use Dictionary as Output?
  =================================

  Dictionary are easy to deal with programatically but mathematically they are not
  very precise and use of them can quickly lead to inconsistency and a lot of
  confusion. For example addition of two solutions is a fairly valid operations
  but dictionaries by themselves have no add operation. Since we are representing
  solutions as dictionary we can define a custom add operation where value of x
  variable is added with value of other x variable and value of y variable
  with the value of other y variable. But what if the user tries to add solution
  of two equations which have different sets of variables? Say one has x and y
  as variables and other has u and v? We cannot allow this addition because
  the keys of dictionaries are unordered but this behavior will be inconsistent
  with the one variable case because it will be absurd to not to allow addition of
  two numbers, say one obtained by solution of x = 1 and other by solving y = 2.


What are some really cool stuff that solveset can do?
=====================================================

 TODO


What is this domain argument about?
===================================

 TODO


Design Decision
===============

* There is a code level and interface level separation between solvers
  for equations in complex domain and equations in real domain.
  - `solveset_real()`
  - `solveset_complex()`

* TODO


What will you do with the old solve?
====================================

 TODO


References
==========

 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/wiki/GSoC-2015-Ideas#solvers
 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/wiki/GSoC-2014-Application-Harsh-Gupta:-Solvers
 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/9438#issuecomment-109289855


TODO: Remove the line below
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Use :func:`solveset` to solve equations or expressions (assumed to be equal to 0) for a single variable.
Solving an equation like x**2 == 1 can be done as follows::

    >>> from sympy.solvers.solveset import *
    >>> from sympy import Symbol, Eq
    >>> x = Symbol('x')
    >>> solveset(Eq(x**2, 1), x)
    {-1, 1}

Or one may manually rewrite the equation as an expression equal to 0::

    >>> solveset(x**2 - 1, x)
    {-1, 1}

The first argument for :func:`solveset` is an expression (equal to zero) or an equation and the second argument
is the symbol that we want to solve the equation for.

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset_real

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset_complex

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.invert_real

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.invert_complex

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.domain_check


linear_eq_to_matrix
-------------------

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.linear_eq_to_matrix


linsolve
--------

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.linsolve


Diophantine Equations (DEs)
---------------------------

See :ref:`diophantine-docs`

Inequalities
------------

See :ref:`inequality-docs`

Ordinary Differential equations (ODEs)
--------------------------------------

See :ref:`ode-docs`.

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs)
-------------------------------------

See :ref:`pde-docs`.

Commit message:

Answer about the domain argument
Signed-off-by: AMiT Kumar <dtu.amit@gmail.com>

doc/src/modules/solvers/solveset.rst, after:

Solveset
========

.. module:: sympy.solvers.solveset

Solveset Documentation
======================


What's wrong with solve():
==========================

SymPy already has a pretty powerful `solve` function. But it has a lot of major
issues

1. It doesn't have a consistent output for various types of solutions
   It needs to return a lot of types of solutions consistently:
   * single solution : ` x == 1`
   * Multiple solutions: `x**2 == 1`
   * No Solution: `x**2 + 1 == 0; x is real`
   * Interval of solution: `floor(x) == 0`
   * Infinitely many solutions: `sin(x) == 0`
   * Multivariate functions with point solutions: `x**2 + y**2 == 0`
   * Multivariate functions with non point solution: `x**2 + y**2 == 1`
   * System of equations: `x + y == 1` and `x - y == 0`
   * Relational: `x > 0`
   * And the most important case "We don't Know"


2. The input API is also a mess, there are a lot of parameters. Many of them
   are not needed and they make it hard for the user and the developers to
   work on solvers.

3. There are cases like finding the maxima and minima of function using
   critical points where it is important to know if it has returned all the
   solutions. `solve` does not guarantee this.

TODO

Why Solveset?
=============

* `solveset` has a cleaner input and output interface: `solveset` returns a set
  object and a set object take care of all the types of the output. For cases
  where it doesn't "know" all the solutions a `NotImplementedError` is raised.
  For input only takes the equation and the variables for which the equations
  has to be solved.

* `solveset` can return infinitely many solutions. For example solving for
  `sin(x) = 0` returns {2⋅n⋅π | n ∊ ℤ} ∪ {2⋅n⋅π + π | n ∊ ℤ} Whereas `solve`
  only returns [0, π]

* There is a clear code level and interface level separation between solvers
  for equations in complex domain and equations in real domain. For example
  solving `exp(x) = 1` when x is complex returns the set of all solutions that
  is {2⋅n⋅ⅈ⋅π | n ∊ ℤ} . Whereas if x is a real symbol then only {0} is
  returned.

* `solveset` returns a solution only when it can guarantee that it is returning
  all the solutions.



Why do we use Sets as an output type?
=====================================

The main reason for using sets as output to solvers is that it can consistently
represent many types of solutions. For single variable case it can represent:

  * No solution (by null set)

  * Finitely many solutions (by FiniteSet)

  * Infinitely many solutions, both countably and uncountably infinite solutions
    (using the ImageSet module) Interval

  * There can also be bizarre solutions to equations like set of all rational number.

  No other programmer's object (list, dictionary, python sets) provides the
  flexibility of mathematical sets which our sets module try to emulate. The
  second reason to use sets is that they are close to the entities which
  mathematician's deals with and it makes it easier to reason about them.
  Another advantage of using objects closer to mathematical entities is that the
  user won't have to "learn" our representation and she can have her expectations
  transferred from her mathematical experience.

  For multivariate case we are representing solutions as a set of points in a n
  dimensional space and a point is represented by a FiniteSet of ordered tuple.
  Please Note that, the General FiniteSet is unordered, but a FiniteSet with
  a tuple as it's first argument is ordered. For example:

  - FiniteSet(1, 2, 3) : {1, 2, 3}    # Unordered
  - FiniteSet((1, 2, 3)) {(1, 2, 3)}  # Ordered

  Why not use Dictionary as Output?
  =================================

  Dictionary are easy to deal with programatically but mathematically they are not
  very precise and use of them can quickly lead to inconsistency and a lot of
  confusion. For example addition of two solutions is a fairly valid operations
  but dictionaries by themselves have no add operation. Since we are representing
  solutions as dictionary we can define a custom add operation where value of x
  variable is added with value of other x variable and value of y variable
  with the value of other y variable. But what if the user tries to add solution
  of two equations which have different sets of variables? Say one has x and y
  as variables and other has u and v? We cannot allow this addition because
  the keys of dictionaries are unordered but this behavior will be inconsistent
  with the one variable case because it will be absurd to not to allow addition of
  two numbers, say one obtained by solution of x = 1 and other by solving y = 2.


What is this domain argument about?
===================================

 Solveset is designed to be independent of the assumptions on the
 variable being solved for and instead, uses the `domain` argument to
 decide the solver to dispatch the equation to, namely `solveset_real`
 or `solveset_complex`. It's unlike the old `solve` which considers the
 assumption on the variable.

    >>> from sympy.solvers.solveset import solveset
    >>> from sympy.abc import x
    >>> solveset(x**2 + 1, x) # domain=S.Complexes is default
    {-I, I}
    >>> solveset(x**2 + 1, x, domain=S.Reals)
    EmptySet()


Design Decision
===============

* There is a code level and interface level separation between solvers
  for equations in complex domain and equations in real domain.
  - `solveset_real()`
  - `solveset_complex()`

* TODO


What will you do with the old solve?
====================================

 TODO


References
==========

 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/wiki/GSoC-2015-Ideas#solvers
 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/wiki/GSoC-2014-Application-Harsh-Gupta:-Solvers
 * https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/9438#issuecomment-109289855


TODO: Remove the line below
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Use :func:`solveset` to solve equations or expressions (assumed to be equal to 0) for a single variable.
Solving an equation like x**2 == 1 can be done as follows::

    >>> from sympy.solvers.solveset import *
    >>> from sympy import Symbol, Eq
    >>> x = Symbol('x')
    >>> solveset(Eq(x**2, 1), x)
    {-1, 1}

Or one may manually rewrite the equation as an expression equal to 0::

    >>> solveset(x**2 - 1, x)
    {-1, 1}

The first argument for :func:`solveset` is an expression (equal to zero) or an equation and the second argument
is the symbol that we want to solve the equation for.

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset_real

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.solveset_complex

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.invert_real

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.invert_complex

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.domain_check


linear_eq_to_matrix
-------------------

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.linear_eq_to_matrix


linsolve
--------

.. autofunction:: sympy.solvers.solveset.linsolve


Diophantine Equations (DEs)
---------------------------

See :ref:`diophantine-docs`

Inequalities
------------

See :ref:`inequality-docs`

Ordinary Differential equations (ODEs)
--------------------------------------

See :ref:`ode-docs`.

Partial Differential Equations (PDEs)
-------------------------------------

See :ref:`pde-docs`.
