doc/src/modules/utilities/autowrap.rst, before:

===============
Autowrap Module
===============

The autowrap module works very well in tandem with the Indexed classes of the
:ref:`tensor_module`.  Here is a simple example that shows how to setup a binary
routine that calculates a matrix-vector product.

>>> from sympy.utilities.autowrap import autowrap
>>> from sympy import symbols, IndexedBase, Idx, Eq
>>> A, x, y = map(IndexedBase, ['A', 'x', 'y'])
>>> m, n = symbols('m n', integer=True)
>>> i = Idx('i', m)
>>> j = Idx('j', n)
>>> instruction = Eq(y[i], A[i, j]*x[j]); instruction
Eq(y[i], x[j]*A[i, j])

Because the code printers treat Indexed objects with repeated indices as a
summation, the above equality instance will be translated to low-level code for
a matrix vector product.  This is how you tell SymPy to generate the code,
compile it and wrap it as a python function:

>>> matvec = autowrap(instruction)                 # doctest: +SKIP

That's it.  Now let's test it with some numpy arrays.  The default wrapper
backend is f2py.  The wrapper function it provides is set up to accept python
lists, which it will silently convert to numpy arrays.  So we can test the
matrix vector product like this:

>>> M = [[0, 1],
...      [1, 0]]
>>> matvec(M, [2, 3])                              # doctest: +SKIP
[ 3.  2.]

Implementation details
======================

The autowrap module is implemented with a backend consisting of CodeWrapper
objects.  The base class ``CodeWrapper`` takes care of details about module
name, filenames and options.  It also contains the driver routine, which runs
through all steps in the correct order, and also takes care of setting up and
removing the temporary working directory.

The actual compilation and wrapping is done by external resources, such as the
system installed f2py command. The Cython backend runs a distutils setup script
in a subprocess. Subclasses of CodeWrapper takes care of these
backend-dependent details.

API Reference
=============

.. automodule:: sympy.utilities.autowrap
   :members:

Commit message:

tensor: Added EinsteinSum function for implicit sums with Indexed
Previously expressions with tensor.Indexed objects involving repeated indices
automatically implied summation. This commit now requires wrapping an
expression in the new EinsteinSum function for summation to be implied.
EinsteinSum also has the following additional functionality:

* Automatic generation of Python functions taking NumPy arrays:
  EinsteinSum.numpify.
* Allows differentiation wrt other Indexed objects; e.g. now
  h[i].diff(h[j]) = delta[i, j] instead of 0.
* Correctly implements Einstein summation convention; e.g.
  EinsteinSum(h[i]*h[i]) *does* imply a sum over i (previously didn't).

Other changes in this commit:

* Added DeltaIndexedBase subclass of IndexedBase for Kronecker delta tensors.
* Deleted tensor.index_methods.
* Updated and improved tensor module's documentation.
* Updated code printers to use EinsteinSum.

Potential issues with this commit:

* In order to allow differentiation like h[i].diff(h[j]) = delta[i, j],
  added hack to differentiation code in core.function. Should be scrutinized.
* Differentiation like in the previous bullet automatically creates
  new DeltaIndexedBase objects with a default label. But if two are created,
  e.g. by differentiating wrt two different Indexed objects, they will then be
  determined to be the same in EinsteinSum.numpify, even if they have
  different shapes. Mentioned in docstring of EinsteinSum.numpify.
* No deprecation of functions from tensor.index_methods.
* No deprecation of former way of calling code generation routines (sans
  EinsteinSum).
* Name = EinsteinSum? ImplicitSum? IndexedSum?
* Name = DeltaIndexedBase?

doc/src/modules/utilities/autowrap.rst, after:

===============
Autowrap Module
===============

The autowrap module works very well in tandem with the Indexed classes of the
:ref:`tensor_module`.  Here is a simple example that shows how to setup a
binary routine that calculates a matrix-vector product (see also the
:func:`EinsteinSum.numpify` method in the :ref:`tensor module <tensor_sums>`).

>>> from sympy.utilities.autowrap import autowrap
>>> from sympy import symbols, IndexedBase, Idx, Eq, EinsteinSum
>>> A, x, y = map(IndexedBase, ['A', 'x', 'y'])
>>> m, n = symbols('m n', integer=True)
>>> i = Idx('i', m)
>>> j = Idx('j', n)
>>> instruction = Eq(y[i], EinsteinSum(A[i, j]*x[j])); instruction
Eq(y[i], EinsteinSum(x[j]*A[i, j]))

Because the code printers treat ``Indexed`` objects with repeated indices
enclosed in an ``EinsteinSum`` function as a summation, the above equality
instance will be translated to low-level code for a matrix-vector product. This
is how you tell SymPy to generate the code, compile it and wrap it as a python
function:

>>> matvec = autowrap(instruction)                 # doctest: +SKIP

That's it.  Now let's test it with some numpy arrays.  The default wrapper
backend is f2py.  The wrapper function it provides is set up to accept python
lists, which it will silently convert to numpy arrays.  So we can test the
matrix vector product like this:

>>> M = [[0, 1],
...      [1, 0]]
>>> matvec(M, [2, 3])                              # doctest: +SKIP
[ 3.  2.]

Implementation details
======================

The autowrap module is implemented with a backend consisting of CodeWrapper
objects.  The base class ``CodeWrapper`` takes care of details about module
name, filenames and options.  It also contains the driver routine, which runs
through all steps in the correct order, and also takes care of setting up and
removing the temporary working directory.

The actual compilation and wrapping is done by external resources, such as the
system installed f2py command. The Cython backend runs a distutils setup script
in a subprocess. Subclasses of CodeWrapper takes care of these
backend-dependent details.

API Reference
=============

.. automodule:: sympy.utilities.autowrap
   :members:
